- Okay, so let's get started.
A lot of people on Instagram.
So, okay, so muscle confusion theory,
I think this came about for a
couple of different reasons.
One is that people notice
when they drastically change
their exercise program, they get sore.
And the question is does
soreness equal growth?
Is that gains?
Is that something that we
need to go looking for?
Do I need to, I'm adjusting my,
do we need to go looking for soreness?
Of course the answer is no.
Soreness has nothing to do with gains.
There's never been any
evidence that that was a thing.
In fact, micro tears in muscle
are highly associated with soreness.
Marathon runners and cyclists
have the most micro tears
of any type of athlete.
They don't build big anything.
So why get excited about muscle soreness?
And I think the other thing
was Arnold Schwarzenegger
was a big promoter of shocking
the muscle into growth.
That's not a thing.
So we all love Arnold Schwarzenegger,
however, that's still not a thing.
So what we need to look at
is what you're trying to do
to the central nervous
system when you expose load
to the body, whether you lift a weight
or even if you're running
or something like that.
Why does adaptation happen?
You give a clear signal to
the central nervous system.
Well, the central nervous
system makes a determination,
"We don't have enough of X."
Like, "We don't have enough bicep,
"so we're gonna work really hard
"to build more bicep tissue."
So to do that, there's certain strategies.
And so, like, when you look
at what the American College
of Sports Medicine has done,
and when they put out a position paper,
that means they've considered
hundreds of studies,
potentially, and looked at
people testing muscle confusion
versus regular standard
lifting with an aim towards
having a greater output every time.
I don't wanna call that
progressive resistance
because there's another, sort of,
poor use of progressive resistance
that we're gonna talk about
later in another video.
But ultimately, whether
you bench press X-weight
for 10 reps and then the
next workout you can do that
same thing for 11
repetitions, you got stronger.
That's a greater output,
and so that means that you
have increased your strength,
so grown muscle.
So when that happens,
especially when sticking
to the same program, you're
going to have a greater amount
of success than if you're just haphazardly
doing one thing versus the other.
And one of the reasons
that might be happening
is that focuses you on skill building,
except only one time,
because, like, okay, let's
say you do a chest workout,
pushups, and then your next
thing is all based on flys,
and then the next thing is
all based on one-arm work
or cross-body work or something like that,
you are not really building a skill.
You're just haphazardly
doing one thing or another,
and then you go to something else
and you're haphazardly doing that too.
And so ultimately, it
just makes you, kind of,
evenly bad at everything.
You're not building
any skills out of that,
and it's not optimum for
muscular growth or performance.
Think about, or part of the reason
the American College of
Sports Medicine looked at this
was when it comes to athletic training
for a very specific purpose,
so very elite athletes,
you wouldn't take an
elite swimmer and say,
"All right, now what we want you to do
"is become a great cyclist
"because that's really gonna
help you in the water."
Like, nobody would do that, nobody.
So ultimately, if you
wanna be a better swimmer,
you've gotta swim.
And you have to stay
focused on what you want.
So for what I'm encouraging people to do
is be as strong and as lean as possible.
Those are two goals that we
can get to pretty easily.
And, by using the right
triggers and the right stimuli
for the central nervous system.
So when you show that,
the central nervous system
that you have a deficit of
bicep issue or trapezius tissue,
and you first go to a fatigue
from a myofibril standpoint,
then a sarcoplasmic standpoint,
meaning first, the amount
of contractile protein,
the actual tissue there,
and then the amount of
fuel held in the tissue.
You ram that all into one experience.
The central nervous system
doesn't have a choice.
"We've just gotta build more traps."
That's it.
And both stimuli manifests
in both types of growth,
and the growth can happen very quickly
if you really clearly
fatigue that musculature.
Now so what else?
One of the justifications for,
like, mixing up your workout
is when people say they're bored.
I hear that from trainers.
"Oh, I wanna keep my
clients from being bored."
Well, there's, to me, there's effective
and not effective; right?
Like, so you wouldn't brush
your teeth with your socks
because you're really bored
of your toothbrush; right?
Like, you just wouldn't do that.
You use a toothbrush every day.
So is it exciting?
I don't know.
I don't particularly feel like
high-fiving a lot of people
when I brush my teeth, but, you know,
probably feel a little
bit better after I do it.
But I feel a lot better
after I do my X3 workout,
so I apologize if the proper
program seems monotonous.
It will be monotonous,
but you're not doing it for
the sake of getting a workout.
That's another thing that,
man, I just wanna throw
somebody off a building
when somebody says, "Hey, can
you get a workout from that?"
It's, like, what does that
even mean, get a workout?
That's just, that's the
vehicle, not the destination.
That's just completely
confusing what your objective is
and, I think, basically, foolish.
Get a workout.
It's to trigger result,
and you're always driving
towards triggering that result.
So working out, it's not entertainment.
You, the entertainment, the enjoyment,
is being stronger and
leaner everywhere you go.
Having better posture everywhere you go.
That's what you enjoy.
And for the people who say,
"Oh, yeah, strength
training is hard, it hurts,"
it's just, like, suck it up.
You don't have a whole
lot of time to commit
to getting that work in that
very brief period of time
and pulling those triggers in the body
and doing the protocol the right way.
And then you just wait
for the growth to happen,
because it will.
So other things I just wanna recap,
and I think we're just
about good on this subject.
I don't wanna beat a dead horse here.
Oh, I did also say the whole, like,
workout of the day thing
that Cross Fitters do,
that's the same, kind of,
like, muscle confusion theory.
And ultimately, like, workouts work.
Like, somebody who does pushups one day
and does something else another day,
it's not like they're gonna
get nothing out of it.
They just won't get as much out of that,
as opposed to really sticking
with something consistently
and applying it and analyzing it,
analyzing it, and analyzing it,
and trying to get a little bit more,
and a little bit more,
and a little bit more out of it each time.
Then you've gotta measure in your head
or if you're writing it
down or making a video
for yourself so you can critique it later.
Like, all those things are
with an eye towards progress,
not just shuffling the
deck and doing some stuff.
So workout of the day,
yeah, sorry, thumbs down.
You know, wouldn't do it.
So when, ultimately,
I did a podcast yesterday
where the interviewer
was asking me some questions about, like,
"God, you're throwing a lot
of ideas that are really
"upsetting to the
strength-training industry."
Well, you know what?
The strength-training industry
isn't really doing that great.
When I walk down the street,
who looks like they exercise?
Nobody, that's who.
Basically, nobody.
So why are people just grabbing a hold
of some many of these principals
that you can just do a Google
Scholar or Medline search
on and realize that they're not real?
And then on top of that,
people are so emotionally
tied to these things
that obviously aren't working.
So why be tied to it?